
--- PAGE 2 ---
Central Archive at the University of Reading 
Reading’s research outputs online


--- PAGE 3 ---
Understanding Distributions of Chess Performances
Kenneth W. Regan1, Bartlomiej Macieja2, and Guy McC. Haworth3
1Department of CSE, University at Buffalo, Amherst, NY 14260 USA; regan@buffalo.edu
2Warsaw, Poland
3School of Systems Engineering, University of Reading, UK; guy.haworth@bnc.oxon.org
Abstract. This paper studies the population of chess players and the distribu-
tion of their performances measured by Elo ratings and by computer analysis of
moves. Evidence that ratings have remained stable since the inception of the Elo
system in the 1970’s is given in several forms: by showing that the population
of strong players ﬁts a simple logistic-curve model without inﬂation, by plotting
players’ average error against the FIDE category of tournaments over time, and by
skill parameters from a model that employs computer analysis keeping a nearly
constant relation to Elo rating across that time. The distribution of the model’s In-
trinsic Performance Ratings can hence be used to compare populations that have
limited interaction, such as between players in a national chess federation and
FIDE, and ascertain relative drift in their respective rating systems.
Keywords. Computer games, chess, ratings, statistics.
1 Introduction
Chess players form a dynamic population of varying skills, fortunes, and aging ten-
dencies, and participate in zero-sum contests. A numerical rating system based only on
the outcomes of the contests determines everyone’s place in the pecking order. There
is much vested interest in the accuracy and stability of the system, with signiﬁcance
extending to other games besides chess and potentially wider areas. Several fundamen-
tal questions about the system lack easy answers: How accurate are the ratings? How
can we judge this? Have ratings inﬂated over time? How can different national rating
systems be compared with the FIDE system? How much variation in performance is
intrinsic to a given skill level?
This paper seeks statistical evidence beyond previous direct attempts to measure
the system’s features. We examine player rating distributions across time since the in-
ception of the Elo rating system by the World Chess Federation (FIDE) in 1971. We
continue work by Haworth, DiFatta, and Regan [1–4] on measuring performance ‘in-
trinsically’ by the quality of moves chosen rather than the results of games. The models
in this work have adjustable parameters that correspond to skill levels calibrated to the
Elo scale. We have also measured aggregate error rates judged by computer analysis of
entire tournaments, and plotted them against the Elo rating category of the tournament.
Major ﬁndings of this paper extend the basic result of [4] that ratings have remained
stable since the 1970’s, contrary to the popular wisdom of extensive rating inﬂation .
Section 5 extends that work to the Elo scale, while the other sections present indepen-
dent supporting material. Related previous work [5–7] is discussed below.

--- PAGE 4 ---
2 Ratings and Distributions
The Elo rating system, which originated for chess but is now used by many other games
and sports, provides rules for updating ratings based on performance in games against
other Elo-rated players, and for bringing new (initially ‘unrated’) players into the sys-
tem. In chess they have a numerical scale where 2800 is achieved by a handful of top
players today, 2700 is needed for most highest-level tournament invitations, 2600 is a
‘strong’ grandmaster (GM), while 2500 is typical of most GM’s, 2400 of International
Masters, 2300 of FIDE Masters, and 2200 of masters in national federations. We em-
phasize that the ratings serve two primary purposes:
1. To indicate position in the world ranking, and
2. To indicate a level of skill.
These two purposes lead to different interpretations of what it means for “inﬂation”
to occur. According to view 1, 2700 historically meant what the neighborhood of 2800
means now: being among the very best, a true world championship challenger. As late
as 1981, Anatoly Karpov topped the ratings at 2695, so no one had 2700, while today
there are forty-ﬁve players 2700 and higher, some of whom have never been invited to
an elite event. Under this view, inﬂation has occurred ipso-facto .
While view 2 is fundamental and has always had adherents, for a long time it had
no reliable benchmarks. The rating system itself does not supply an intrinsic meaning
for the numbers and does not care about their value: arbitrarily add 1000 to every ﬁgure
in 1971 and subsequent initialization of new players, and relative order today would
be identical. However, recent work [4] provides a benchmark to calibrate the Elo scale
to games analyzed in the years 2006–2009, and ﬁnds that ratings ﬁfteen and thirty
years earlier largely correspond to the same benchmark positions. In particular, today’s
echelon of over forty 2700+ players all give the same or better statistics in this paper
than Karpov and Viktor Korchnoi in their prime. We consider that two further objections
to view 2 might take the following forms:
(a) If Karpov and Korchnoi had access to today’s computerized databases and more
extensive opening publications, they would have played (say) 50 to 100 points
higher—as Kasparov did as the 1980’s progressed.
(b) Karpov and Korchnoi were supreme strategists whose strategic insight and depth
of play does not show up in ply-limited computer analysis.
We answer (a) by saying we are concerned only with the quality of moves made
on the board, irrespective of whether and how they are prepared. Regarding also (b)
we ﬁnd that today’s elite make fewer clear mistakes than their forebears. This factor
impacts skill apart from strategic depth. The model from [4] used in this paper ﬁnds a
natural weighting for the relative importance of avoiding mistakes.
Our position in subscribing to view 2 is summed up as today’s players deserve their
ratings . The numerical rating should have a ﬁxed meaning apart from giving a player’s
rank in the world pecking order. In subsequent sections we present the following ev-
idence that there has been no inﬂation, and that the models used for our conclusions
produce reasonable distributions of chess performances.

--- PAGE 5 ---
–The proportion of Master-level ratings accords exactly with what is predicted from
the growth in population alone, without adjusting for inﬂation.
–A version, called AE for “average error,” of the “average difference” (AD) statis-
tic used by Guid and Bratko [5] (see also [6, 7]) to compare world championship
matches. An important scaling discovery leads to Scaled Average Error (SAE). Our
work shows that tournaments of a given category have seen fairly constant (S)AE
over time.
–“Intrinsic Ratings” as judged from computer analysis have likewise remained rela-
tively constant as a function of Elo rating over time—for this we reﬁne the method
of Regan and Haworth [4].
–Intrinsic Ratings for the world’s top players have increased steadily since the mid-
1800s, mirroring the way records have improved in many other sports and human
endeavors.
–Intrinsic Performance Ratings (IPR’s) for players in events fall into similar distribu-
tions as assumed for Tournament Performance Ratings (TPR’s) in the rating model,
with somewhat higher variance. They can also judge inﬂation or deﬂation between
two rating systems, such as those between FIDE and a national federation much of
whose population has little experience in FIDE-rated events.
The last item bolsters the Regan-Haworth model [4] as a reliable indicator of per-
formance, and hence enhances the signiﬁcance of the third and fourth items.
The persistence of rating controversies after many years of the standard analysis of
rating curves and populations calls to mind the proverbial elephant that six blind men
are trying to picture. Our non-standard analyses may take the hind legs, but since they
all agree, we feelm we understand the elephant. Besides providing new insight into
distributional analysis of chess performances, the general nature of our tools allows
application in other games and ﬁelds besides chess.
3 Population Statistics
Highlighted by the seminal work of de Solla Price on the metrics of science [8], re-
searchers have gained an understanding of the growth of human expertise in various
subjects. In an environment with no limits on resources for growth, de Solla Price
showed that the rate of growth is proportional to the population,
dN
dtaN; (1)
which yields an exponential growth curve. For example, this holds for a population
of academic scientists, each expected to graduate some number a > 1of students as
new academic scientists. However, this growth cannot last forever, as it would lead
to a day when the projected number of scientists would be greater than the total world
population. Indeed, Goodstein [9] showed that the growth of PhD’s in physics produced
each year in the United States stopped being exponential around 1970, and now remains
at a constant level of about 1000.
The theory of the growth of a population under limiting factors has been success-
ful in other subjects, especially in biology. Since the work ofVerhulst [10] it has been

--- PAGE 6 ---
widely veriﬁed that in an environment with limited resources the growth of animals (for
instance tigers on an island) can be well described by a logistic function
N(t) =Nmax
(1 +a(exp) bt)arising fromdN
dtaN bN2; (2)
wherebN2represents a part responsible for a decrease of a growth due to an over-
population, which is quadratic insofar as every animal interacts, for instance ﬁghts for
resources, with every other animal. We demonstrate that this classic model also de-
scribes the growth of the total number of chess players in time with a high degree of
ﬁt.
We use a minimum rating of 2203—which FIDE for the ﬁrst three Elo decades
rounded up to 2205—because the rating ﬂoor and the start rating of new players have
been signiﬁcantly reduced from 2200 which was used for many years.
Figure 1 shows the number of 2203+ rated players, and a curve obtained for some
particular values of a,b, andNmax. Since there are many data points and only three pa-
rameters, the ﬁt is striking. This implies that the growth of the number of chess players
can be explained without a need to postulate inﬂation.
4 Average Error and Results by Tournament Categories
The ﬁrst author has run automated analysis of almost every major event in chess history,
using the program R YBKA 3 [11] to ﬁxed reported depth 13 ply1in Single-PV mode.
1That R YBKA versions often report the depth as -2 or -1 in UCI feedback has fueled speculation
that the true depth here is 16, while the ﬁrst author ﬁnds it on a par in playing strength with
some other prominent programs ﬁxed to depths in the 17–20 range.

--- PAGE 7 ---
This mode is similar to how Guid and Bratko [5] operated the program C RAFTY to
depth (only) 12, and how others have run other programs since. Game turns 1–8, turns
where R YBKA reported a more than 3.00 advantage already at the previous move, and
turns involved in repetitions are weeded out.
The analysis computations have included allround-robin events of Category 11 or
higher, using all events given categories in the ChessBase Big 2010 database plus The
Week In Chess supplements through TWIC 893 12/19/11. The categories are the aver-
age rating of players in the event taken in blocks of 25 points; for instance, category 11
means the average rating is between 2500 and 2525, while category 15 means 2600–
2625.
For every move that is not equivalent to R YBKA ’s top move, the “error” is taken
as the value of the present position minus the value after the move played. The errors
over a game or player-performance or an entire tournament are summed and divided by
the number of moves (those not weeded out) to make the “Average Error” (AE) statis-
tic. Besides including moves 9–12 and using Rybka depth 13 with a [ 3:00;+3:00]
evaluation range rather than Crafty depth 12 with a [ 2:00;+2:00]range, our statistic
differs from [5] in not attempting to judge the “complexity” of a position, and in several
incidental ways.
For large numbers of games, AD or AE seems to give a reasonable measure of
playing quality, beyond relative ranking as shown in [6]. When aggregated for all tour-
naments in a span of years, the ﬁgures were in fact used to make scale corrections for
the in-depth mode presented in the next section. When AE is plotted against the turn
number, sharply greater error for turns approaching the standard Move 40 time con-
trol is evident; then comes a sharp drop back to previous levels after Move 41. When
AE is plotted against the advantage or disadvantage for the player to move, in intervals
of 0.10 or 0.05 pawns, a scaling pattern emerges. The AE for advantage 0.51–0.60 is
almost double that for near-equality 0.01–0.10, while for -0.51 to -0.60 it is regularly
more than double.
It would seem strange to conclude that strong masters play only half as well when
ahead or behind by half a pawn as even. Rather this seems to be evidence that human
players perceive differences in value in proportion to the overall advantage for one side.
This yields a log-log kind of scaling, with an additive constant that tests place close to 1,
so we used 1. This is reﬂected in the deﬁnition of the scaled difference iin Equation 3
below, since 1=(1 +jzj)in the body of a deﬁnite integral produces ln(1 +jzj). This
produces Scaled Average Error (SAE).
Figure 2 shows AE (called R3 for “raw” and the 3.00 evaluation cutoff) and SAE
(SC3), while Figure 3 shows how both ﬁgures increase markedly toward the standard
Move 40 time control and then level off. For these plots the tournaments were divided
into historical “eras” E5 for 1970–1984, E6 for 1985–1999, E7 for 2000–2009, and
E8 for 2010–. The tournaments totaled 57,610 games, from which 3,607,107 moves
were analyzed (not counting moves 1–8 of each game which were skipped) and over
3.3 million retained within the cutoff. Category 10 and lower tournaments that were
also analyzed bring the numbers over 60,000 games and 4.0 million moves with over
3.7 million retained. Almost all work was done on two quad-core Windows PC’s with
analysis scripted via the Arena GUI v1.99 and v2.01.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Figure 2: Plot of raw AE vs. advantage for player to move, and ﬂattening to SAE.
Figure 3: Plot of AE and SAE by turn number.
Figures 4 and 5 below graph SAE for all tournaments by year as a four-year moving
average , the latter covering moves 17–32 only. The ﬁve lines represent categories 11–
12 (FIDE Elo 2500–2549 average rating), 13–14 (2550–2599), 15–16 (2600–2649),
17–18 (2650–2699), and 19–20 (2700–2749). There were several category 21 events in
1996–2001, none in 2002–2006, and several 21 and 22 events since 2007; the overall
averages of the two groups are plotted as X for 2001 and 2011. The lowest category has
the highest SAE and hence appears at the top.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Figure 4: SAE by tournament category, 4-yr. moving avg., 1971–2011.
Figure 5: SAE by category for moves 17–32 only, 4-yr. moving avg., 1971–2011.
Despite yearly variations the graphs allow drawing two clear conclusions: the cate-
gories do correspond to different levels of SAE, and the lines by-and-large do not slope
up to the right as would indicate inﬂation. Indeed, the downslope of SAE for categories
above 2650 suggests some deﬂation since 1990. Since the SAE statistic depends on how
tactically challenging a game is, and hence does not indicate skill by itself, we need a
more intensive mode of analysis in order to judge skill directly.

--- PAGE 10 ---
5 Intrinsic Ratings Over Time
Haworth [1, 2] and with DiFatta and Regan [3, 12, 4] developed models of fallible deci-
sion agents that can be trained on players’ games and calibrated to a wide range of skill
levels. Their main difference from [5–7] is the use of Multi-PV analysis to obtain uthor-
itative values for all reasonable options, not just the top move(s) and the move played.
Thus each move is evaluated in the full context of available options. The paper [6] gives
evidence that for relative rankings of players, good results can be obtained even with
relatively low search depths, and this is conﬁrmed by [7]. However, we argue that for an
intrinsic standard of quality by which to judge possible rating drift, one needs greater
depth, the full move context, and a variety of scientiﬁc approaches. The papers [3, 12]
apply Bayesian analysis to characterize the performance of human players using a spec-
trum of reference fallible agents . The work reported in [4] and this paper uses a method
patterned on multinomial Bernoulli trials, and obtains a corresponding spectrum.
Thescaling of AE was found important for quality of ﬁt, and henceforth AE means
SAE. It is important to note that SAE from the last section does not directly carry
over to intrinsic ratings in this section, because here we employ the full move analysis
of Multi-PV data. They may be expected to correspond in large samples such as all
tournaments in a range of years for a given category, but here we are considering smaller
samples from a single event or a single player in a single event, and at this stage we
are studying those with more intensive data. What we do instead is use statistical ﬁts
of parameters called s;cto generate projectionsAEefor every position, and use the
aggregate projected AEeon a reference suite of positions as our “standard candle” to
index to the Elo scale.
We also generate projected standard deviations, and hence projected conﬁdence in-
tervals, forAEe(and also the ﬁrst-move match statistic MMe) as shown below. This
in turn yields projected conﬁdence intervals for the intrinsic ratings. Preliminary testing
with randomly-generated subsets of the training data suggest that the actual deviations
in real-world data are bounded by a factor of 1:15for the MM statistic and 1:4for AE,
and these are signiﬁed by a subscripted afor ‘actual’ in tables below. The projections
represent the ideal case of zero modeling error, so we regard the difference shown by
the tests as empirical indication of the present level of modeling error.
Models of this kind function in one direction by taking in game analyses and using
statistical ﬁtting to generate values of the skill parameters to indicate the intrinsic level
of the games. They function in the other direction by taking pre-set values of the skill
parameters and generating a probability distribution of next moves by an agent of that
skill proﬁle. The deﬁning equation of the particular model used in [4], relating the
probabilitypiof thei-th alternative move to p0for the best move and its difference in
value, is
log(1=pi)
log(1=p0)=e (
s)c
; wherei=Zv0
vi1
1 +jzjdz: (3)
Here when the value v0of the best move and viof thei-th move have the same sign,
the integral giving the scaled difference simpliﬁes to jlog(1 +v0) log(1 +vi)j. Note
that this employs the empirically-determined scaling law from the last section.
The skill parameters are called sfor “sensitivity” and cfor “consistency” because
swhen small can enlarge small differences in value, while cwhen large sharply cuts